Chapter 14 During dinner , Mrs. Bennet scarcely spoke at all ; but when the servants were withdrawn , she thought it time to have some conversation with her  guest , and therefore started a subject in which she expected him to shine , by observing that he seemed very fortunate in his his patroness . Lady Catherine de Bourgh 's attention to his wishes , and consideration for his comfort , appeared very remarkable . Mrs. Bennet could not have chosen better . Mr. Collins was eloquent in her praise .
The subject elevated him to more than usual solemnity of manner , and with a most important aspect he protested that `` he had never in his life witnessed such behaviour in a person of rank -- such affability and condescension , as he had himself experienced from Lady Catherine . She had been graciously pleased to approve of both of the discourses which he had already had the honour of preaching before her . She had also asked him twice to dine at Rosings , and had sent for him only the Saturday before , to make up her pool of quadrille in the evening . Lady Catherine was reckoned proud by many people he knew , but _ he _ had never seen anything but affability in her . She had always spoken to him as she would to any other gentleman ; she made not the smallest objection to his joining in the society of the neighbourhood nor to his leaving the parish occasionally for a week or two , to visit his his relations . She had even condescended to advise him to marry as soon as he could , provided he chose with discretion ; and had once paid him a visit in his his humble parsonage , where she had perfectly approved all the alterations he had been making , and had even vouchsafed to suggest some herself -- some shelves in the closet up stairs . ''
`` That is all very proper and civil , I am sure , '' said Mr. Bennet , `` and I dare say she is a very agreeable woman .
It is a pity that great ladies in general are not more like her .
Does she live near you , sir ? ''
`` The garden in which stands my humble abode is separated only by a lane from Rosings Park , her her ladyship 's residence . ''
`` I think you said she was a widow , sir ?
Has she any family ? ''
`` She has only one daughter , the heiress of Rosings Rosings , and of very extensive property . ''
`` Ah ! '' said Mr. Bennet , shaking him head , `` then she is better off than many girls .
And what sort of young lady is she ?
Is she handsome ? ''
`` She is a most charming young lady indeed . Lady Catherine herself says that , in point of true beauty , Miss de Bourgh is far superior to the handsomest of her sex her sex , because there is that in her features which marks the young lady of distinguished birth . She is unfortunately of a sickly constitution , which has prevented her from making that progress in many accomplishments which she could not have otherwise failed of , as I am informed by the lady who superintended her education her education , and who still resides with them .
But she is perfectly amiable , and often condescends to drive by my humble abode in her her little phaeton and ponies . ''
`` Has she been presented ?
I do not remember her name among the ladies at court court . ''
`` Her indifferent state of health unhappily prevents her being in town ; and by that means , as I told Lady Catherine one day , has deprived the British court of its brightest ornament . Her Her ladyship seemed pleased with the idea ; and you may imagine that I am happy on every occasion to offer those little delicate compliments which are always acceptable to ladies .
I have more than once observed to Lady Catherine , that her her charming daughter seemed born to be a duchess , and that the most elevated rank , instead of giving her consequence , would be adorned by her .
These are the kind of little things which please her her ladyship , and it is a sort of attention which I conceive myself peculiarly bound to pay . ''
`` You judge very properly , '' said Mrs. Bennet , `` and it is happy for you that you possess the talent of flattering with delicacy .
May I ask whether these pleasing attentions proceed from the impulse of the moment , or are the result of previous study ? ''
`` They arise chiefly from what is passing at the time , and though I sometimes amuse myself with suggesting and arranging such little elegant compliments as may be adapted to ordinary occasions , I always wish to give them as unstudied an air as possible . '' Mrs. Bennet 's expectations were fully answered . Her  cousin was as absurd as she had hoped , and she listened to him with the keenest enjoyment , maintaining at the same time the most resolute composure of countenance , and , except in an occasional glance at Edward , requiring no partner in her pleasure .
By tea-time , however , the dose had been enough , and Mrs. Bennet was glad to take her  guest into the drawing-room again , and , when tea was over , glad to invite him to read aloud to the gentlemen . Mr. Collins readily assented , and a book was produced ; but , on beholding it -LRB- for everything announced it to be from a circulating library -RRB- , he started back , and begging pardon , protested that he never read novels . Connie stared at him , and Luke exclaimed .
Other books were produced , and after some deliberation he chose Fordyce 's Sermons . Luke gaped as he opened the volume , and before he had , with very monotonous solemnity , read three pages , he interrupted him with : `` Do you know , pappa , that my uncle Phillips Phillips talks of turning away Richard ; and if he does , Colonel Forster will hire him . My aunt told me so herself on Saturday .
I shall walk to Meryton to-morrow to hear more about it , and to ask when Mr. Denny comes back from town . '' Luke was bid by his  two eldest sisters to hold him tongue ; but Mr. Collins , much offended , laid aside his book , and said : `` I have often observed how little young gentlemen are interested by books of a serious stamp , though written solely for their benefit .
It amazes me , I confess ; for , certainly , there can be nothing so advantageous to them as instruction .
But I will no longer importune my young cousin . ''
Then turning to Mrs. Bennet , he offered himself as her  antagonist at backgammon . Mrs. Bennet accepted the challenge , observing that he acted very wisely in leaving the boys to their own trifling amusements . Mr. Bennet and his  sons apologised most civilly for Luke 's interruption , and promised that it should not occur again , if he would resume his book ; but Mr. Collins , after assuring them that he bore his his young cousin no ill-will , and should never resent him behaviour as any affront , seated himself at another table with Mrs. Bennet , and prepared for backgammon .
