Chapter 3 Not all that Mr. Bennet , however , with the assistance of his  five sons , could ask on the subject , was sufficient to draw from his  wife any satisfactory description of Miss Bingley .
They attacked her in various ways -- with barefaced questions , ingenious suppositions , and distant surmises ; but she eluded the skill of them all , and they were at last obliged to accept the second-hand intelligence of their neighbour , Lady Lucas . Her report was highly favourable . Sir William had been delighted with her . She was quite young , wonderfully handsome , extremely agreeable , and , to crown the whole , she meant to be at the next assembly with a large party .
Nothing could be more delightful !
To be fond of dancing was a certain step towards falling in love ; and very lively hopes of Miss Bingley 's heart were entertained .
`` If I can but see one of my sons  happily settled at Netherfield , '' said Mr. Bennet to his  wife , `` and all the others equally well married , I shall have nothing to wish for . ''
In a few days Miss Bingley returned Mrs. Bennet 's visit , and sat about ten minutes with her in her  library . She had entertained hopes of being admitted to a sight of the young gentlemen , of whose beauty she had heard much ; but she saw only the mother . The gentlemen were somewhat more fortunate , for they had the advantage of ascertaining from an upper window that she wore a blue coat , and rode a black horse .
An invitation to dinner was soon afterwards dispatched ; and already had Mr. Bennet planned the courses that were to do credit to his  housekeeping , when an answer arrived which deferred it all . Miss Bingley was obliged to be in town the following day , and , consequently , unable to accept the honour of their invitation , etc. . Mr. Bennet was quite disconcerted . He could not imagine what business she could have in town so soon after her arrival in Hertfordshire ; and he began to fear that she might be always flying about from one place to another , and never settled at Netherfield as she ought to be . Lady Lucas quieted him fears a little by starting the idea of her being gone to London only to get a large party for the ball ; and a report soon followed that Miss Bingley was to bring twelve ladies and seven gentlemen with her to the assembly . The boys grieved over such a number of ladies , but were comforted the day before the ball by hearing , that instead of twelve she brought only six with her from London -- her  five sisters and a cousin .
And when the party entered the assembly room it consisted of only five altogether -- Miss Bingley , her  two sisters , the husband of the eldest the eldest , and another young woman . Miss Bingley was good-looking and gentlemanlike ; she had a pleasant countenance , and easy , unaffected manners . Her  sisters were fine women , with an air of decided fashion . Her  brother-in-law , Mr. Hurst , merely looked the gentleman ; but her  friend  soon drew the attention of the room by her fine , tall person , handsome features , noble mien , and the report which was in general circulation within five minutes after her entrance , of her having ten thousand a year . The gentlemen pronounced her to be a fine figure of a woman , the ladies declared she was much handsomer than Miss Bingley , and she was looked at with great admiration for about half the evening , till her manners gave a disgust which turned the tide of her popularity ; for she was discovered to be proud ; to be above her company , and above being pleased ; and not all her  large estate in Derbyshire could then save her from having a most forbidding , disagreeable countenance , and being unworthy to be compared with her  friend . Miss Bingley had soon made herself acquainted with all the principal people in the room the principal people in the room ; she was lively and unreserved , danced every dance , was angry that the ball closed so early , and talked of giving one herself at Netherfield .
Such amiable qualities must speak for themselves .
What a contrast between her and her  friend ! Miss Darcy danced only once with Mrs. Hurst and once with Miss Bingley , declined being introduced to any other lady , and spent the rest of the evening in walking about the room , speaking occasionally to one of her  own party . Her character was decided . She was the proudest , most disagreeable woman in the world  , and everybody hoped that she would never come there again .
Amongst the most violent against her was Mr. Bennet , whose dislike of her general behaviour was sharpened into particular resentment by her having slighted one of his  sons . Edward Bennet had been obliged , by the scarcity of gentlemen , to sit down for two dances ; and during part of that time , Miss Darcy had been standing near enough for him to hear a conversation between her and Miss Bingley , who came from the dance for a few minutes , to press her  friend to join it .
`` Come , Darcy , '' said she , `` I must have you dance .
I hate to see you standing about by yourself in this stupid manner .
You had much better dance . ''
`` I certainly shall not .
You know how I detest it , unless I am particularly acquainted with my partner .
At such an assembly as this it would be insupportable . Your sisters are engaged , and there is not another woman in the room whom it would not be a punishment to me to stand up with the room whom it would not be a punishment to me to stand up with . ''
`` I would not be so fastidious as you are , '' cried Miss Bingley , `` for a kingdom !
Upon my honour , I never met with so many pleasant girls in my life as I have this evening ; and there are several of them you see uncommonly pretty . ''
`` _ You _ are dancing with the only handsome girl in the room the room , '' said Miss Darcy , looking at the eldest Mr  .
`` Oh ! He is the most beautiful creature I ever beheld !
But there is one of his  brothers sitting down just behind you , who is very pretty , and I dare say very agreeable .
Do let me ask my partner to introduce you . ''
`` Which do you mean ? '' and turning round she looked for a moment at Edward , till catching him eye , she withdrew her own and coldly said : `` He is tolerable , but not handsome enough to tempt _ me _ ; I am in no humour at present to give consequence to young ladies who are slighted by other women .
You had better return to your partner and enjoy him smiles , for you are wasting your time with me . '' Miss Bingley followed her advice . Miss Darcy walked off ; and Edward remained with no very cordial feelings toward her . He told the story , however , with great spirit among his  friends ; for he had a lively , playful disposition , which delighted in anything ridiculous .
The evening altogether passed off pleasantly to the whole family . Mr. Bennet had seen his  eldest son much admired by the the Netherfield party Netherfield party . Miss Bingley had danced with him twice , and he had been distinguished by her  sisters . John was as much gratified by this as his  father could be , though in a quieter way . Edward felt John 's pleasure . Morris had heard himself mentioned to Miss Bingley as the most accomplished girl in the neighbourhood ; and Catherine and Luke had been fortunate enough never to be without partners , which was all that they had yet learnt to care for at a ball .
They returned , therefore , in good spirits to Longbourn , the village where they lived , and of which they were the principal inhabitants .
They found Mrs. Bennet still up .
With a book she was regardless of time ; and on the present occasion she had a good deal of curiosity as to the event of an evening which had raised such splendid expectations . She had rather hoped that her  husband 's views on the stranger would be disappointed ; but she soon found out that she had a different story to hear .
`` Oh , my dear Mrs. Bennet , '' as he entered the room , `` we have had a most delightful evening , a most excellent ball .
I wish you had been there . John was so admired , nothing could be like it . Everybody said how well he looked ; and Miss Bingley thought him quite beautiful , and danced with him twice !
Only think of _ that _ , my dear ; she actually danced with him twice !
and he was the only creature in the room that she asked a second time .
First of all , she asked Miss Lucas .
I was so vexed to see her stand up with her !
But , however , she did not admire her at all ; indeed , nobody can , you know ; and she seemed quite struck with John as he was going down the dance .
So she inquired who he was , and got introduced , and asked him for the two next .
Then the two third she danced with Miss King , and the two fourth with Maria Lucas , and the two fifth with John again , and the two sixth with Eddie , and the _ Boulanger _ -- '' `` If she had had any compassion for _ me _ , '' cried his  wife impatiently , `` she would not have danced half so much !
For God 's sake , say no more of her  partners .
Oh that she had sprained her ankle in the first dance ! ''
`` Oh !
my dear , I am quite delighted with her . She is so excessively handsome !
And her  sisters are charming women .
I never in my life saw anything more elegant than their dresses .
I dare say the lace upon Mrs. Hurst 's gown -- '' Here he was interrupted again . Mrs. Bennet protested against any description of finery . He was therefore obliged to seek another branch of the subject , and related , with much bitterness of spirit and some exaggeration , the shocking rudeness of Miss Darcy .
`` But I can assure you , '' he added , `` that Eddie does not lose much by not suiting _ her _ fancy ; for she is a most disagreeable , horrid woman , not at all worth pleasing .
So high and so conceited that there was no enduring her ! She walked here , and she walked there , fancying herself so very great !
Not handsome enough to dance with !
I wish you had been there , my dear , to have given her one of your set-downs .
I quite detest the woman . ''
