Chapter 31 Colonel Fitzwilliam 's manners were very much admired at the Parsonage , and the ladies all felt that he must add considerably to the pleasures of their engagements at Rosings .
It was some days , however , before they received any invitation thither -- for while there were visitors in the house , they could not be necessary ; and it was not till Easter-day , almost a week after the gentlemen 's arrival , that they were honoured by such an attention , and then they were merely asked on leaving church to come there in the evening .
For the last week they had seen very little of Lady Catherine or her her daughter . Colonel Fitzwilliam had called at the Parsonage more than once during the time , but Miss Darcy they had seen only at church .
The invitation was accepted of course , and at a proper hour they joined the party in Lady Catherine Lady Catherine 's drawing-room . Her Her ladyship received them civilly , but it was plain that their company was by no means so acceptable as when she could get nobody else ; and she was , in fact , almost engrossed by her her nephews , speaking to them , especially to Darcy , much more than to any other person in the room the room . Colonel Fitzwilliam seemed really glad to see them ; anything was a welcome relief to him at Rosings ; and Mrs. Collins Mrs. Collins 's handsome friend had moreover caught his fancy very much . He now seated himself by him , and talked so agreeably of Kent and Hertfordshire , of travelling and staying at home , of new books and music , that Edward had never been half so well entertained in that room before ; and they conversed with so much spirit and flow , as to draw the attention of Lady Catherine herself , as well as of Miss Darcy .
_ Her _ eyes had been soon and repeatedly turned towards them with a look of curiosity ; and that her her ladyship , after a while , shared the feeling , was more openly acknowledged , for she did not scruple to call out : `` What is that you are saying , Fitzwilliam ?
What is it you are talking of ?
What are you telling Mr. Bennet ?
Let me hear what it is . ''
`` We are speaking of music , madam , '' said he , when no longer able to avoid a reply .
`` Of music !
Then pray speak aloud .
It is of all subjects my delight .
I must have my share in the conversation if you are speaking of music .
There are few people in England England , I suppose , who have more true enjoyment of music than myself , or a better natural taste .
If I had ever learnt , I should have been a great proficient .
And so would Anne , if her health had allowed her to apply .
I am confident that she would have performed delightfully .
How does Georgiana get on , Darcy ? '' Miss Darcy spoke with affectionate praise of her  sister 's proficiency .
`` I am very glad to hear such a good account of her , '' said Lady Catherine ; `` and pray tell her from me , that she can not expect to excel if she does not practice a good deal . ''
`` I assure you , madam , '' she replied , `` that she does not need such advice . She practises very constantly . ''
`` So much the better .
It can not be done too much ; and when I next write to her , I shall charge her not to neglect it on any account .
I often tell young ladies that no excellence in music is to be acquired without constant practice .
I have told Mr. Bennet several times , that he will never play really well unless he practises more ; and though Mrs. Collins has no instrument , he is very welcome , as I have often told him , to come to Rosings every day , and play on the pianoforte in Mrs. Jenkinson Mrs. Jenkinson 's room . He would be in nobody 's way , you know , in that part of the house the house . '' Miss Darcy looked a little ashamed of her  aunt 's ill-breeding , and made no answer .
When coffee was over , Colonel Fitzwilliam reminded Edward of having promised to play to him ; and he sat down directly to the instrument . He drew a chair near him . Lady Catherine listened to half a song , and then talked , as before , to her her other niece ; till the latter walked away from her , and making with her usual deliberation towards the pianoforte stationed herself so as to command a full view of the handsome performer 's countenance . Edward saw what she was doing , and at the first convenient pause , turned to her with an arch smile , and said : `` You mean to frighten me , Miss Darcy , by coming in all this state to hear me ?
I will not be alarmed though your sister _ does _ play so well .
There is a stubbornness about me that never can bear to be frightened at the will of others .
My courage always rises at every attempt to intimidate me . ''
`` I shall not say you are mistaken , '' she replied , `` because you could not really believe me to entertain any design of alarming you ; and I have had the pleasure of your acquaintance long enough to know that you find great enjoyment in occasionally professing opinions which in fact are not your own . '' Edward laughed heartily at this picture of himself , and said to Colonel Fitzwilliam , `` Your cousin will give you a very pretty notion of me , and teach you not to believe a word I say .
I am particularly unlucky in meeting with a person so able to expose my real character , in a part of the world where I had hoped to pass myself the world where I had hoped to pass myself off with some degree of credit .
Indeed , Miss Darcy , it is very ungenerous in you to mention all that you knew to my disadvantage in Hertfordshire -- and , give me leave to say , very impolitic too -- for it is provoking me to retaliate , and such things may come out as will shock your relations to hear . ''
`` I am not afraid of you , '' said she , smilingly .
`` Pray let me hear what you have to accuse her of , '' cried Colonel Fitzwilliam .
`` I should like to know how she behaves among strangers . ''
`` You shall hear then -- but prepare yourself for something very dreadful .
The first time of my ever seeing her in Hertfordshire , you must know , was at a ball -- and at this ball , what do you think she did ? She danced only four dances , though ladies were scarce ; and , to my certain knowledge , more than one young gentleman was sitting down in want of a partner . Miss Darcy , you can not deny the fact . ''
`` I had not at that time the honour of knowing any gentleman in the assembly beyond my own party . ''
`` True ; and nobody can ever be introduced in a ball-room .
Well , Colonel Fitzwilliam , what do I play next ?
My fingers wait your orders . ''
`` Perhaps , '' said Darcy , `` I should have judged better , had I sought an introduction ; but I am ill-qualified to recommend myself to strangers . ''
`` Shall we ask your cousin the reason of this ? '' said Edward , still addressing Colonel Fitzwilliam .
`` Shall we ask her why a woman of sense and education , and who has lived in the world , is ill qualified to recommend herself to strangers ? ''
`` I can answer your question , '' said Fitzwilliam , `` without applying to her .
It is because she will not give herself the trouble . ''
`` I certainly have not the talent which some people possess , '' said Darcy , `` of conversing easily with those I have never seen before .
I can not catch their tone of conversation , or appear interested in their concerns , as I often see done . ''
`` My fingers , '' said Edward , `` do not move over this instrument in the masterly manner which I see so many men's do .
They have not the same force or rapidity , and do not produce the same expression .
But then I have always supposed it to be my own fault -- because I will not take the trouble of practising .
It is not that I do not believe _ my _ fingers as capable as any other man 's of superior execution . '' Darcy smiled and said , `` You are perfectly right .
You have employed your time much better . No one admitted to the privilege of hearing you can think anything wanting . We neither of us perform to strangers . ''
Here they were interrupted by Lady Catherine , who called out to know what they were talking of . Edward immediately began playing again . Lady Catherine approached , and , after listening for a few minutes , said to Darcy : `` Mr. Bennet would not play at all amiss if he practised more , and could have the advantage of a London master . He has a very good notion of fingering , though him taste is not equal to Anne 's . Anne would have been a delightful performer , had her health allowed her to learn . '' Edward looked at Darcy to see how cordially she assented to her  cousin 's praise ; but neither at that moment nor at any other could he discern any symptom of love ; and from the whole of her behaviour to Miss de Bourgh he derived this comfort for Miss Bingley , that she might have been just as likely to marry _ her _ , had she been her  relation . Lady Catherine continued her remarks on Edward 's performance , mixing with them many instructions on execution and taste . Edward received them with all the forbearance of civility , and , at the request of the gentlemen , remained at the instrument till her her ladyship 's carriage was ready to take them all home .
