Chapter 30 Sir William stayed only a week at Hunsford , but his visit was long enough to convince him of his his daughter 's being most comfortably settled , and of her possessing such a husband and such a neighbour as were not often met with .
While Sir William was with them , Mr. Collins devoted his morning to driving him out in his his gig , and showing him the country ; but when he went away , the whole family returned to their usual employments , and Edward was thankful to find that they did not see more of his  cousin by the alteration , for the chief of the time between breakfast and dinner was now passed by him either at work in the garden or in reading and writing , and looking out of the window in his his own book-room , which fronted the road the road . The room in which the ladies the ladies sat was backwards . Edward had at first rather wondered that Charlotte should not prefer the dining-parlour for common use ; it was a better sized room , and had a more pleasant aspect ; but he soon saw that his  friend had an excellent reason for what she did , for Mr. Collins would undoubtedly have been much less in his his own apartment , had they sat in one equally lively ; and he gave Charlotte credit for the arrangement .
From the drawing-room they could distinguish nothing in the lane , and were indebted to Mr. Collins for the knowledge of what carriages went along , and how often especially Miss de Bourgh drove by in her phaeton , which he never failed coming to inform them of , though it happened almost every day . She not unfrequently stopped at the Parsonage , and had a few minutes ' conversation with Charlotte , but was scarcely ever prevailed upon to get out .
Very few days passed in which Mr. Collins did not walk to Rosings , and not many in which his his wife did not think it necessary to go likewise ; and till Edward recollected that there might be other family livings to be disposed of , he could not understand the sacrifice of so many hours .
Now and then they were honoured with a call from her her ladyship , and nothing escaped her observation that was passing in the room during these visits . She examined into their employments , looked at their work , and advised them to do it differently ; found fault with the arrangement of the furniture ; or detected the housemaid in negligence ; and if she accepted any refreshment , seemed to do it only for the sake of finding out that Mrs. Collins 's joints of meat were too large for her her family . Edward soon perceived , that though this great lady was not in commission of the peace of the county , she was a most active magistrate in her her own parish , the minutest concerns of which were carried to her by Mr. Collins ; and whenever any of the cottagers were disposed to be quarrelsome , discontented , or too poor , she sallied forth into the village to settle their differences , silence their complaints , and scold them into harmony and plenty .
The entertainment of dining at Rosings was repeated about twice a week ; and , allowing for the loss of Sir William , and there being only one card-table in the evening , every such entertainment was the counterpart of the first . Their other engagements were few , as the style of living in the neighbourhood in general was beyond Mr. Collins 's reach .
This , however , was no evil to Edward , and upon the whole he spent him time comfortably enough ; there were half-hours of pleasant conversation with Charlotte , and the weather was so fine for the time of year that he had often great enjoyment out of doors . His favourite walk , and where he frequently went while the others were calling on Lady Catherine , was along the open grove which edged that side of the park , where there was a nice sheltered path , which no one seemed to value but herself the park , where there was a nice sheltered path , which no one seemed to value but himself , and where he felt beyond the reach of Lady Catherine 's curiosity .
In this quiet way , the first fortnight of him visit soon passed away .
Easter was approaching , and the week preceding it was to bring an addition to the family at Rosings , which in so small a circle must be important . Edward had heard soon after him arrival that Miss Darcy was expected there in the course of a few weeks , and though there were not many of her acquaintances whom she did not prefer him her acquaintances whom she did not prefer he did not prefer , her coming would furnish one comparatively new to look at in their Rosings parties , and he might be amused in seeing how hopeless Miss Bingley 's designs on her were , by her behaviour to her  cousin , for whom she was evidently destined by Lady Catherine , who talked of his coming with the greatest satisfaction , spoke of her in terms of the highest admiration , and seemed almost angry to find that she had already been frequently seen by Miss Lucas and himself . Her arrival was soon known at the Parsonage ; for Mr. Collins was walking the whole morning within view of the lodges opening into Hunsford Lane Hunsford Lane , in order to have the earliest assurance of it , and after making his bow as the carriage turned into the Park , hurried home with the great intelligence .
On the following morning he hastened to Rosings to pay his respects .
There were two nephews of Lady Catherine to require them , for Miss Darcy had brought with her a Colonel Fitzwilliam , the younger son of his uncle her his uncle Lord -- -- , and , to the great surprise of all the party , when Mr. Collins returned , the gentlemen accompanied him . Charlotte had seen them from her her husband 's room , crossing the road , and immediately running into the other , told the girls what an honour they might expect , adding : `` I may thank you , Ed , for this piece of civility . Miss Darcy would never have come so soon to wait upon me . '' Edward had scarcely time to disclaim all right to the compliment , before their approach was announced by the door-bell , and shortly afterwards the three gentlemen entered the room . Colonel Fitzwilliam , who led the way , was about thirty , not handsome , but in person and address most truly the gentleman . Miss Darcy looked just as she had been used to look in Hertfordshire -- paid her compliments , with her usual reserve , to Mrs. Collins , and whatever might be her feelings toward her her friend , met him with every appearance of composure . Edward merely curtseyed to her without saying a word . Colonel Fitzwilliam entered into conversation directly with the readiness and ease of a well-bred man , and talked very pleasantly ; but his his cousin , after having addressed a slight observation on the house and garden to Mrs. Collins , sat for some time without speaking to anybody .
At length , however , her civility was so far awakened as to inquire of Edward after the health of his  family . He answered her in the usual way , and after a moment 's pause , added : `` My eldest brother has been in town these three months .
Have you never happened to see him re ? '' He was perfectly sensible that she never had ; but he wished to see whether she would betray any consciousness of what had passed between the Bingleys and John , and he thought she looked a little confused as she answered that she had never been so fortunate as to meet Mr. Bennet .
The subject was pursued no farther , and the gentlemen soon afterwards went away .
