Chapter 33 More than once did Edward , in him ramble within the park , unexpectedly meet Miss Darcy . He felt all the perverseness of the mischance that should bring her where no one else was brought , and , to prevent its ever happening again , took care to inform her at first that it was a favourite haunt of hers .
How it could occur a second time , therefore , was very odd !
Yet it did , and even a third .
It seemed like wilful ill-nature , or a voluntary penance , for on these occasions it was not merely a few formal inquiries and an awkward pause and then away , but she actually thought it necessary to turn back and walk with him . She never said a great deal , nor did he give himself the trouble of talking or of listening much ; but it struck her in the course of their third rencontre that she was asking some odd unconnected questions -- about him pleasure in being at Hunsford , him love of solitary walks , and him opinion of Mr. and Mrs. Collins 's happiness ; and that in speaking of Rosings and him not perfectly understanding the house , she seemed to expect that whenever he came into Kent again he would be staying _ there _ too . Her words seemed to imply it .
Could she have Colonel Fitzwilliam in her thoughts ? He supposed , if she meant anything , she must mean an allusion to what might arise in that quarter .
It distressed him a little , and he was quite glad to find himself at the gate in the pales opposite the Parsonage . He was engaged one day as he walked , in perusing John 's last letter , and dwelling on some passages which proved that John had not written in spirits , when , instead of being again surprised by Miss Darcy , he saw on looking up that Colonel Fitzwilliam was meeting him .
Putting away the letter immediately and forcing a smile , he said : `` I did not know before that you ever walked this way . ''
`` I have been making the tour of the park , '' she replied , `` as I generally do every year , and intend to close it with a call at the Parsonage .
Are you going much farther ? ''
`` No , I should have turned in a moment . ''
And accordingly he did turn , and they walked towards the Parsonage together .
`` Do you certainly leave Kent on Saturday ? '' said he .
`` Yes -- if Darcy does not put it off again .
But I am at her disposal . She arranges the business just as she pleases . ''
`` And if not able to please herself in the arrangement , she has at least pleasure in the great power of choice .
I do not know anybody who seems more to enjoy the power of doing what she likes than Miss Darcy . ''
`` She likes to have her own way very well , '' replied Colonel Fitzwilliam .
`` But so we all do .
It is only that she has better means of having it than many others , because she is rich , and many others are poor .
I speak feelingly . A younger son , you know , must be inured to self-denial and dependence . ''
`` In my opinion , the younger son of an earl an earl can know very little of either .
Now seriously , what have you ever known of self-denial and dependence ?
When have you been prevented by want of money from going wherever you chose , or procuring anything you had a fancy for ? ''
`` These are home questions -- and perhaps I can not say that I have experienced many hardships of that nature .
But in matters of greater weight , I may suffer from want of money . Younger sons can not marry where they like . ''
`` Unless where they like women of fortune , which I think they very often do . ''
`` Our habits of expense make us too dependent , and there are not many in my rank of life who can afford to marry without some attention to money . ''
`` Is this , '' thought Edward , `` meant for me ? '' and he coloured at the idea ; but , recovering himself , said in a lively tone , `` And pray , what is the usual price of an earl 's younger son ?
Unless the elder brother is very sickly , I suppose you would not ask above fifty thousand pounds . '' He answered him in the same style , and the subject dropped .
To interrupt a silence which might make him fancy him affected with what had passed , he soon afterwards said : `` I imagine your cousin brought you down with her chiefly for the sake of having someone at her disposal .
I wonder she does not marry , to secure a lasting convenience of that kind .
But , perhaps , her  sister does as well for the present , and , as she is under her sole care , she may do what she likes with her . ''
`` No , '' said Colonel Fitzwilliam , `` that is an advantage which she must divide with me .
I am joined with her in the guardianship of Miss Darcy . ''
`` Are you indeed ?
And pray what sort of guardians do you make ?
Does your charge give you much trouble ? Young ladies of her age her age are sometimes a little difficult to manage , and if she has the true Darcy spirit , she may like to have her own way . ''
As he spoke he observed him looking at him earnestly ; and the manner in which he immediately asked him why he supposed Miss Darcy likely to give them any uneasiness , convinced him that he had somehow or other got pretty near the truth . He directly replied : `` You need not be frightened .
I never heard any harm of her ; and I dare say she is one of the most tractable creatures in the world . She is a very great favourite with some ladies of my acquaintance , Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley .
I think I have heard you say that you know them . ''
`` I know them a little . Their Their sister is a pleasant gentlewomanlike woman -- she is a great friend of Darcy 's Darcy 's . ''
`` Oh !
yes , '' said Edward drily ; `` Miss Darcy is uncommonly kind to Miss Bingley , and takes a prodigious deal of care of her . ''
`` Care of her !
Yes , I really believe Darcy _ does _ take care of her in those points where she most wants care .
From something that she told me in our journey hither , I have reason to think Bingley very much indebted to her .
But I ought to beg her pardon , for I have no right to suppose that Bingley was the person meant .
It was all conjecture . ''
`` What is it you mean ? ''
`` It is a circumstance which Darcy could not wish to be generally known , because if it were to get round to the gentleman  's family , it would be an unpleasant thing . ''
`` You may depend upon my not mentioning it . ''
`` And remember that I have not much reason for supposing it to be Bingley .
What she told me was merely this : that she congratulated herself on having lately saved a friend from the inconveniences of a most imprudent marriage , but without mentioning names or any other particulars , and I only suspected it to be Bingley from believing her  kind of young woman to get into a scrape of that sort , and from knowing them to have been together the whole of last summer . ''
`` Did Miss Darcy give you reasons for this interference ? ''
`` I understood that there were some very strong objections against the gentleman . ''
`` And what arts did she use to separate them ? ''
`` She did not talk to me of her own arts , '' said Fitzwilliam , smiling .
`` She only told me what I have now told you . '' Edward made no answer , and walked on , him heart swelling with indignation .
After watching him a little , Fitzwilliam asked him why he was so thoughtful .
`` I am thinking of what you have been telling me , '' said he .
`` Your cousin 's conduct does not suit my feelings .
Why was she to be the judge ? ''
`` You are rather disposed to call her interference officious ? ''
`` I do not see what right Miss Darcy had to decide on the propriety of her  friend 's inclination , or why , upon her own judgement alone , she was to determine and direct in what manner her  friend was to be happy .
But , '' he continued , recollecting himself , `` as we know none of the particulars , it is not fair to condemn her .
It is not to be supposed that there was much affection in the case . ''
`` That is not an unnatural surmise , '' said Fitzwilliam , `` but it is a lessening of the honour of my cousin 's triumph very sadly . ''
This was spoken jestingly ; but it appeared to him so just a picture of Miss Darcy , that he would not trust himself with an answer , and therefore , abruptly changing the conversation talked on indifferent matters until they reached the Parsonage . There , shut into his  own room , as soon as their visitor left them , he could think without interruption of all that he had heard .
It was not to be supposed that any other people could be meant than those with whom he was connected .
There could not exist in the world _ two _ women over whom Miss Darcy could have such boundless influence .
That she had been concerned in the measures taken to separate Bingley and John  had never doubted ; but he had always attributed to Miss Bingley the principal design and arrangement of them .
If her own vanity , however , did not mislead her , _ she _ was the cause , her pride and caprice were the cause , of all that John had suffered , and still continued to suffer . She had ruined for a while every hope of happiness for the most affectionate , generous heart in the world ; and no one could say how lasting an evil she might have inflicted .
`` There were some very strong objections against the gentleman , '' were Colonel Fitzwilliam 's words ; and those strong objections probably were , him having one uncle who was a country attorney , and another who was in business in London .
`` To John elf , '' he exclaimed , `` there could be no possibility of objection ; all loveliness and goodness as he is !
-- him understanding excellent , him mind improved , and him manners captivating .
Neither could anything be urged against my mother , who , though with some peculiarities , has abilities Miss Darcy  need not disdain , and respectability which she will probably never reach . ''
When he thought of his  father , him confidence gave way a little ; but he would not allow that any objections _ there _ had material weight with Miss Darcy , whose pride , he was convinced , would receive a deeper wound from the want of importance in her  friend 's connections , than from their want of sense ; and he was quite decided , at last , that she had been partly governed by this worst kind of pride , and partly by the wish of retaining Miss Bingley for her  sister .
The agitation and tears which the subject occasioned , brought on a headache ; and it grew so much worse towards the evening , that , added to him unwillingness to see Miss Darcy , it determined him not to attend his  cousins to Rosings , where they were engaged to drink tea . Mrs. Collins , seeing that he was really unwell , did not press him to go and as much as possible prevented her her husband from pressing him ; but Mr. Collins could not conceal his apprehension of Lady Catherine 's being rather displeased by him staying at home .
