Chapter 21 The discussion of Mr. Collins 's offer was now nearly at an end , and Edward had only to suffer from the uncomfortable feelings necessarily attending it , and occasionally from some peevish allusions of his  father .
As for the gentleman himself , _ his _ feelings were chiefly expressed , not by embarrassment or dejection , or by trying to avoid him , but by stiffness of manner and resentful silence . He scarcely ever spoke to him , and the assiduous attentions which he had been so sensible of himself were transferred for the rest of the day to Miss Lucas , whose civility in listening to him was a seasonable relief to them all , and especially to her her friend .
The morrow produced no abatement of Mr. Bennet 's ill-humour or ill health . Mr. Collins was also in the same state of angry pride . Edward had hoped that his resentment might shorten his visit , but his plan did not appear in the least affected by it . He was always to have gone on Saturday , and to Saturday he meant to stay .
After breakfast , the boys walked to Meryton to inquire if Mr. Wickham were returned , and to lament over his absence from the Netherfield ball . He joined them on their entering the town , and attended them to their uncle 's where his regret and vexation , and the concern of everybody , was well talked over .
To Edward , however , he voluntarily acknowledged that the necessity of his absence _ had _ been self-imposed .
`` I found , '' said he , `` as the time drew near that I had better not meet Miss Darcy ; that to be in the same room , the same party with her for so many hours together , might be more than I could bear , and that scenes might arise unpleasant to more than myself . '' He highly approved his forbearance , and they had leisure for a full discussion of it , and for all the commendation which they civilly bestowed on each other , as Wickham and another officer walked back with them to Longbourn , and during the walk he particularly attended to him . His accompanying them was a double advantage ; he felt all the compliment it offered to himself , and it was most acceptable as an occasion of introducing him to his  mother and father .
Soon after their return , a letter was delivered to Mr. Bennet ; it came from Netherfield .
The envelope contained a sheet of elegant , little , hot-pressed paper , well covered with a lady 's fair , flowing hand ; and Edward saw his  brother 's countenance change as he read it , and saw him dwelling intently on some particular passages . John recollected himself soon , and putting the letter away , tried to join with him usual cheerfulness in the general conversation ; but Edward felt an anxiety on the subject which drew off him attention even from Wickham ; and no sooner had he and his his companion taken leave , than a glance from John invited him to follow him up stairs .
When they had gained their own room , John , taking out the letter , said : `` This is from Caroline Bingley ; what it contains has surprised me a good deal . The whole party have left Netherfield by this time , and are on their way to town -- and without any intention of coming back again .
You shall hear what she says . '' He then read the first sentence aloud , which comprised the information of their having just resolved to follow their sister to town directly , and of their meaning to dine in Grosvenor Street , where Mr. Hurst Mr. Hurst had a house a house .
The next was in these words : `` I do not pretend to regret anything I shall leave in Hertfordshire , except your society , my dearest friend ; but we will hope , at some future period , to enjoy many returns of that delightful intercourse we have known , and in the meanwhile may lessen the pain of separation by a very frequent and most unreserved correspondence .
I depend on you for that . ''
To these highflown expressions Edward listened with all the insensibility of distrust ; and though the suddenness of their removal surprised him , he saw nothing in it really to lament ; it was not to be supposed that their absence from Netherfield would prevent Miss Bingley 's being there ; and as to the loss of their society , he was persuaded that John must cease to regard it , in the enjoyment of her .
`` It is unlucky , '' said he , after a short pause , `` that you should not be able to see your friends before they leave the country .
But may we not hope that the period of future happiness to which Miss Bingley looks forward may arrive earlier than she is aware , and that the delightful intercourse you have known as friends will be renewed with yet greater satisfaction as sisters ? Miss Bingley will not be detained in London by them . '' `` Caroline decidedly says that none of the party the party will return into Hertfordshire this winter .
I will read it to you : '' `` When my sister left us yesterday , she imagined that the business which took her to London might be concluded in three or four days ; but as we are certain it can not be so , and at the same time convinced that when Charlotte gets to town she will be in no hurry to leave it again , we have determined on following her thither , that she may not be obliged to spend her vacant hours in a comfortless hotel . Many of my acquaintances are already there for the winter ; I wish that I could hear that you , my dearest friend , had any intention of making one of the crowd -- but of that I despair .
I sincerely hope your Christmas in Hertfordshire may abound in the gaieties which that season generally brings , and that your beaux will be so numerous as to prevent your feeling the loss of the three of whom we shall deprive you . ''
`` It is evident by this , '' added John , `` that she comes back no more this winter . ''
`` It is only evident that Miss Bingley does not mean that she _ should _ . ''
`` Why will you think so ?
It must be her own doing . She is her  own mistress .
But you do not know _ all _ .
I _ will _ read you the passage which particularly hurts me .
I will have no reserves from _ you _ . ''
`` Miss Darcy is impatient to see her  sister ; and , to confess the truth , _ we _ are scarcely less eager to meet her again .
I really do not think Georgiana Darcy has her equal for beauty , elegance , and accomplishments ; and the affection she inspires in Louisa and myself is heightened into something still more interesting , from the hope we dare entertain of her being hereafter our sister .
I do not know whether I ever before mentioned to you my feelings on this subject ; but I will not leave the country without confiding them , and I trust you will not esteem them unreasonable . My sister admires her greatly already ; she will have frequent opportunity now of seeing her on the most intimate footing ; her her relations all wish the connection as much as her own ; and a sister 's partiality is not misleading me , I think , when I call Charlotte most capable of engaging any woman 's heart .
With all these circumstances to favour an attachment , and nothing to prevent it , am I wrong , my dearest John , in indulging the hope of an event which will secure the happiness of so many ? ''
`` What do you think of _ this _ sentence , my dear Eddie ? '' said John as he finished it .
`` Is it not clear enough ?
Does it not expressly declare that Caroline neither expects nor wishes me to be her her brother ; that she is perfectly convinced of her her sister 's indifference ; and that if she suspects the nature of my feelings for her , she means -LRB- most kindly ! -RRB-
to put me on my guard ?
Can there be any other opinion on the subject ? ''
`` Yes , there can ; for mine is totally different .
Will you hear it ? ''
`` Most willingly . ''
`` You shall have it in a few words . Miss Bingley sees that her her sister is in love with you , and wants her to marry Miss Darcy . She follows her to town in hope of keeping her there , and tries to persuade you that she does not care about you . '' John shook him head .
`` Indeed , John , you ought to believe me .
No one who has ever seen you together can doubt her affection . Miss Bingley , I am sure , can not . She is not such a simpleton .
Could she have seen half as much love in Miss Darcy for herself , she would have ordered her wedding clothes .
But the case is this : We are not rich enough or grand enough for them ; and she is the more anxious to get Miss Darcy for her her sister , from the notion that when there has been _ one _ intermarriage , she may have less trouble in achieving a second ; in which there is certainly some ingenuity , and I dare say it would succeed , if Miss de Bourgh were out of the way .
But , my dearest John , you can not seriously imagine that because Miss Bingley tells you her her sister greatly admires Miss Darcy , she is in the smallest degree less sensible of _ your _ merit than when she took leave of you on Tuesday , or that it will be in her power to persuade her that , instead of being in love with you , she is very much in love with her her friend . ''
`` If we thought alike of Miss Bingley , '' replied John , `` your representation of all this might make me quite easy .
But I know the foundation is unjust . Caroline is incapable of wilfully deceiving anyone ; and all that I can hope in this case is that she is deceiving herself . ''
`` That is right .
You could not have started a more happy idea , since you will not take comfort in mine .
Believe her to be deceived , by all means .
You have now done your duty by her , and must fret no longer . ''
`` But , my dear brother , can I be happy , even supposing the best , in accepting a man whose sisters and friends are all wishing her to marry elsewhere  and friends are all wishing her to marry elsewhere ? ''
`` You must decide for yourself , '' said Edward ; `` and if , upon mature deliberation , you find that the misery of disobliging her  two sisters is more than equivalent to the happiness of being her  husband , I advise you by all means to refuse her . ''
`` How can you talk so ? '' said John , faintly smiling .
`` You must know that though I should be exceedingly grieved at their disapprobation , I could not hesitate . ''
`` I did not think you would ; and that being the case , I can not consider your situation with much compassion . ''
`` But if she returns no more this winter , my choice will never be required .
A thousand things may arise in six months ! ''
The idea of her returning no more Edward treated with the utmost contempt .
It appeared to him merely the suggestion of Caroline 's interested wishes , and he could not for a moment suppose that those wishes , however openly or artfully spoken , could influence a young woman so totally independent of everyone . He represented to his  brother as forcibly as possible what he felt on the subject , and had soon the pleasure of seeing its happy effect . John 's temper was not desponding , and he was gradually led to hope , though the diffidence of affection sometimes overcame the hope , that Bingley would return to Netherfield and answer every wish of him heart .
They agreed that Mr. Bennet should only hear of the departure of the family , without being alarmed on the score of the lady 's conduct ; but even this partial communication gave him a great deal of concern , and he bewailed it as exceedingly unlucky that the ladies should happen to go away just as they were all getting so intimate together .
After lamenting it , however , at some length , he had the consolation that Miss Bingley would be soon down again and soon dining at Longbourn , and the conclusion of all was the comfortable declaration , that though she had been invited only to a family dinner , he would take care to have two full courses .
