Chapter 26 Mrs. Gardiner 's caution to Edward was punctually and kindly given on the first favourable opportunity of speaking to him alone ; after honestly telling him what she thought , she thus went on : `` You are too sensible a boy , Eddie , to fall in love merely because you are warned against it ; and , therefore , I am not afraid of speaking openly .
Seriously , I would have you be on your guard .
Do not involve yourself or endeavour to involve him in an affection which the want of fortune would make so very imprudent .
I have nothing to say against _ him _ ; he is a most interesting young man ; and if he had the fortune he ought to have , I should think you could not do better .
But as it is , you must not let your fancy run away with you .
You have sense , and we all expect you to use it . Your mother would depend on _ your _ resolution and good conduct , I am sure .
You must not disappoint your mother . ''
`` My dear aunt , this is being serious indeed . ''
`` Yes , and I hope to engage you to be serious likewise . ''
`` Well , then , you need not be under any alarm .
I will take care of myself , and of Mr. Wickham too . He shall not be in love with me , if I can prevent it . ''
`` Edward , you are not serious now . ''
`` I beg your pardon , I will try again .
At present I am not in love with Mr. Wickham ; no , I certainly am not .
But he is , beyond all comparison , the most agreeable man I ever saw -- and if he becomes really attached to me -- I believe it will be better that he should not .
I see the imprudence of it .
Oh !
_ that _ abominable Mr. Darcy ! My mother 's opinion of me does me the greatest honour , and I should be miserable to forfeit it . My mother , however , is partial to Mr. Wickham .
In short , my dear aunt , I should be very sorry to be the means of making any of you unhappy ; but since we see every day that where there is affection , young people are seldom withheld by immediate want of fortune from entering into engagements with each other , how can I promise to be wiser than so many of my fellow-creatures if I am tempted , or how am I even to know that it would be wisdom to resist ?
All that I can promise you , therefore , is not to be in a hurry .
I will not be in a hurry to believe myself his first object .
When I am in company with him , I will not be wishing .
In short , I will do my best . ''
`` Perhaps it will be as well if you discourage his coming here so very often .
At least , you should not _ remind _ your father of inviting him . ''
`` As I did the other day , '' said Edward with a conscious smile : `` very true , it will be wise in me to refrain from _ that _ .
But do not imagine that he is always here so often .
It is on your account that he has been so frequently invited this week .
You know my father 's ideas as to the necessity of constant company for his  friends .
But really , and upon my honour , I will try to do what I think to be the wisest ; and now I hope you are satisfied . '' His  aunt assured him that she was , and Edward having thanked her for the kindness of her hints , they parted ; a wonderful instance of advice being given on such a point , without being resented . Mr. Collins returned into Hertfordshire soon after it had been quitted by the Gardiners and John ; but as he took up his abode with the Lucases , his arrival was no great inconvenience to Mr. Bennet . His marriage was now fast approaching , and he was at length so far resigned as to think it inevitable , and even repeatedly to say , in an ill-natured tone , that he `` _ wished _ they might be happy . ''
Thursday was to be the wedding day , and on Wednesday Miss Lucas paid her farewell visit ; and when she rose to take leave , Edward , ashamed of his  father 's ungracious and reluctant good wishes , and sincerely affected himself , accompanied her out of the room .
As they went downstairs together , Charlotte said : `` I shall depend on hearing from you very often , Ed . ''
`` _ That _ you certainly shall . ''
`` And I have another favour to ask you .
Will you come and see me ? ''
`` We shall often meet , I hope , in Hertfordshire . ''
`` I am not likely to leave Kent for some time .
Promise me , therefore , to come to Hunsford . '' Edward could not refuse , though he foresaw little pleasure in the visit .
`` My father and Maria are coming to me in March , '' added Charlotte , `` and I hope you will consent to be of the party .
Indeed , Ed , you will be as welcome as either of them . ''
The wedding took place ; the bride and bridegroom set off for Kent from the church door , and everybody had as much to say , or to hear , on the subject as usual . Edward soon heard from his  friend ; and their correspondence was as regular and frequent as it had ever been ; that it should be equally unreserved was impossible . Edward could never address her without feeling that all the comfort of intimacy was over , and though determined not to slacken as a correspondent , it was for the sake of what had been , rather than what was . Charlotte 's first letters were received with a good deal of eagerness ; there could not but be curiosity to know how she would speak of her her new home , how she would like Lady Catherine , and how happy she would dare pronounce herself to be ; though , when the letters were read , Edward felt that Charlotte expressed herself on every point exactly as he might have foreseen . She wrote cheerfully , seemed surrounded with comforts , and mentioned nothing which she could not praise . The house , furniture , neighbourhood , and roads , were all to her taste , and Lady Catherine 's behaviour was most friendly and obliging .
It was Mr. Collins 's picture of Hunsford and Rosings rationally softened ; and Edward perceived that he must wait for him own visit there to know the rest . John had already written a few lines to his  brother to announce their safe arrival in London ; and when he wrote again , Edward hoped it would be in him power to say something of the Bingleys . His impatience for this second letter was as well rewarded as impatience generally is . John had been a week in town without either seeing or hearing from Caroline . He accounted for it , however , by supposing that him last letter to his  friend from Longbourn had by some accident been lost .
`` My aunt , '' he continued , `` is going to-morrow into that part of the town the town , and I shall take the opportunity of calling in Grosvenor Street . '' He wrote again when the visit was paid , and he had seen Miss Bingley .
`` I did not think Caroline in spirits , '' were him words , `` but she was very glad to see me , and reproached me for giving her no notice of my coming to London .
I was right , therefore , my last letter had never reached her .
I inquired after their sister , of course . She was well , but so much engaged with Miss Darcy that they scarcely ever saw her .
I found that Miss Darcy was expected to dinner .
I wish I could see her .
My visit was not long , as Caroline and Mrs. Hurst were going out .
I dare say I shall see them soon here . '' Edward shook him head over this letter .
It convinced him that accident only could discover to Miss Bingley   brother 's being in town .
Four weeks passed away , and John saw nothing of her . He endeavoured to persuade himself that he did not regret it ; but he could no longer be blind to Miss Bingley 's inattention .
After waiting at home every morning for a fortnight , and inventing every evening a fresh excuse for her , the visitor did at last appear ; but the shortness of her stay , and yet more , the alteration of her manner would allow John to deceive himself no longer .
The letter which he wrote on this occasion to his  brother will prove what he felt .
`` My dearest Lizzy will , I am sure , be incapable of triumphing in him better judgement , at my expense , when I confess myself to have been entirely deceived in Miss Bingley 's regard for me .
But , my dear brother , though the event has proved you right , do not think me obstinate if I still assert that , considering what her behaviour was , my confidence was as natural as your suspicion .
I do not at all comprehend her reason for wishing to be intimate with me ; but if the same circumstances were to happen again , I am sure I should be deceived again . Caroline did not return my visit till yesterday ; and not a note , not a line , did I receive in the meantime .
When she did come , it was very evident that she had no pleasure in it ; she made a slight , formal apology , for not calling before , said not a word of wishing to see me again , and was in every respect so altered a creature , that when she went away I was perfectly resolved to continue the acquaintance no longer .
I pity , though I can not help blaming her . She was very wrong in singling me out as she did ; I can safely say that every advance to intimacy began on her side .
But I pity her , because she must feel that she has been acting wrong , and because I am very sure that anxiety for her her sister is the cause of it .
I need not explain myself farther ; and though _ we _ know this anxiety to be quite needless , yet if she feels it , it will easily account for her behaviour to me ; and so deservedly dear as she is to her  sister , whatever anxiety she must feel on her behalf is natural and amiable .
I can not but wonder , however , at her having any such fears now , because , if she had at all cared about me , we must have met , long ago . She knows of my being in town , I am certain , from something she said herself ; and yet it would seem , by her manner of talking , as if she wanted to persuade herself that she is really partial to Miss Darcy .
I can not understand it .
If I were not afraid of judging harshly , I should be almost tempted to say that there is a strong appearance of duplicity in all this .
But I will endeavour to banish every painful thought , and think only of what will make me happy -- your affection , and the invariable kindness of my dear uncle and aunt .
Let me hear from you very soon . Miss Bingley said something of her never returning to Netherfield again , of giving up the house , but not with any certainty . We had better not mention it .
I am extremely glad that you have such pleasant accounts from our friends at Hunsford Hunsford .
Pray go to see them , with Sir William and Maria .
I am sure you will be very comfortable there .
-- Yours , etc. '' This letter gave Edward some pain ; but him spirits returned as he considered that John would no longer be duped , by the sister at least .
All expectation from the sister was now absolutely over . He would not even wish for a renewal of her attentions . Her character sunk on every review of it ; and as a punishment for her , as well as a possible advantage to John , he seriously hoped she might really soon marry Miss Darcy  's sister , as by Wickham 's account , she would make her abundantly regret what she had thrown away . Mrs. Gardiner about this time reminded Edward of him promise concerning that gentleman , and required information ; and Edward had such to send as might rather give contentment to his  aunt than to himself . His apparent partiality had subsided , his attentions were over , he was the admirer of some one else . Edward was watchful enough to see it all , but he could see it and write of it without material pain . His heart had been but slightly touched , and him vanity was satisfied with believing that _ he _ would have been his only choice , had fortune permitted it .
The sudden acquisition of ten thousand pounds was the most remarkable charm of the young lady to whom he was now rendering himself agreeable he was now rendering himself agreeable ; but Edward , less clear-sighted perhaps in this case than in Charlotte 's , did not quarrel with him for his wish of independence .
Nothing , on the contrary , could be more natural ; and while able to suppose that it cost him a few struggles to relinquish him , he was ready to allow it a wise and desirable measure for both , and could very sincerely wish him happy .
All this was acknowledged to Mrs. Gardiner ; and after relating the circumstances , he thus went on : `` I am now convinced , my dear aunt , that I have never been much in love ; for had I really experienced that pure and elevating passion , I should at present detest his very name , and wish him all manner of evil .
But my feelings are not only cordial towards _ him _ ; they are even impartial towards Miss King .
I can not find out that I hate her at all , or that I am in the least unwilling to think her a very good sort of girl .
There can be no love in all this .
My watchfulness has been effectual ; and though I certainly should be a more interesting object to all my acquaintances were I distractedly in love with him , I can not say that I regret my comparative insignificance .
Importance may sometimes be purchased too dearly . Connie and Luke take his defection much more to heart than I do .
They are young in the ways of the world , and not yet open to the mortifying conviction that handsome young men must have something to live on as well as the plain . ''
