Chapter 4 When John and Edward were alone , the former , who had been cautious in him praise of Miss Bingley before , expressed to his  brother just how very much he admired her .
`` She is just what a young woman ought to be , '' said he , `` sensible , good-humoured , lively ; and I never saw such happy manners !
-- so much ease , with such perfect good breeding ! ''
`` She is also handsome , '' replied Edward , `` which a young woman ought likewise to be , if she possibly can . Her character is thereby complete . ''
`` I was very much flattered by her asking me to dance a second time .
I did not expect such a compliment . ''
`` Did not you ?
_ I _ did for you .
But that is one great difference between us .
Compliments always take _ you _ by surprise , and _ me _ never .
What could be more natural than her asking you again ? She could not help seeing that you were about five times as pretty as every other man in the room  .
No thanks to her gallantry for that .
Well , she certainly is very agreeable , and I give you leave to like her .
You have liked many a stupider person . ''
`` Dear Eddie ! ''
`` Oh !
you are a great deal too apt , you know , to like people in general .
You never see a fault in anybody .
All the world are good and agreeable in your eyes .
I never heard you speak ill of a human being in your life . ''
`` I would not wish to be hasty in censuring anyone ; but I always speak what I think . ''
`` I know you do ; and it is _ that _ which makes the wonder .
With _ your _ good sense , to be so honestly blind to the follies and nonsense of others !
Affectation of candour is common enough -- one meets with it everywhere .
But to be candid without ostentation or design -- to take the good of everybody 's character and make it still better , and say nothing of the bad -- belongs to you alone .
And so you like this woman 's sisters , too , do you ? Their manners are not equal to her . ''
`` Certainly not -- at first .
But they are very pleasing women when you converse with them . Miss Bingley is to live with her her sister , and keep her  house ; and I am much mistaken if we shall not find a very charming neighbour in her . '' Edward listened in silence , but was not convinced ; their behaviour at the assembly had not been calculated to please in general ; and with more quickness of observation and less pliancy of temper than his  brother , and with a judgement too unassailed by any attention to himself , he was very little disposed to approve them .
They were in fact very fine ladies ; not deficient in good humour when they were pleased , nor in the power of making themselves agreeable when they chose it , but proud and conceited .
They were rather handsome , had been educated in one of the first private seminaries in town town , had a fortune of twenty thousand pounds , were in the habit of spending more than they ought , and of associating with people of rank , and were therefore in every respect entitled to think well of themselves , and meanly of others .
They were of a respectable family in the north of England England ; a circumstance more deeply impressed on their memories than that their sister 's fortune and their own had been acquired by trade . Miss Bingley inherited property to the amount of nearly a hundred thousand pounds from her  father , who had intended to purchase an estate , but did not live to do it . Miss Bingley intended it likewise , and sometimes made choice of her  county ; but as she was now provided with a good house and the liberty of a manor , it was doubtful to many of those who best knew the easiness of her temper , whether she might not spend the remainder of her days at Netherfield , and leave the next generation to purchase . Her  sisters were anxious for her having an estate of her own ; but , though she was now only established as a tenant , Miss Bingley was by no means unwilling to preside at her table -- nor was Mrs. Hurst , who had married a man of more fashion than fortune , less disposed to consider his his house as her her home when it suited her her . Miss Bingley had not been of age two years , when she was tempted by an accidental recommendation to look at Netherfield House . She did look at it , and into it for half-an-hour -- was pleased with the situation and the principal rooms , satisfied with what the owner said in its praise , and took it immediately .
Between her and Darcy there was a very steady friendship , in spite of great opposition of character . Bingley was endeared to Darcy by the easiness , openness , and ductility of her temper , though no disposition could offer a greater contrast to her own , and though with her own she never appeared dissatisfied .
On the strength of Darcy 's regard , Bingley had the firmest reliance , and of her judgement the highest opinion .
In understanding , Darcy was the superior . Bingley was by no means deficient , but Darcy was clever . She was at the same time haughty , reserved , and fastidious , and her manners , though well-bred , were not inviting .
In that respect her  friend had greatly the advantage . Bingley was sure of being liked wherever she appeared , Darcy was continually giving offense .
The manner in which they spoke of the Meryton assembly was sufficiently characteristic . Bingley had never met with more pleasant people or prettier boys in her life ; everybody had been most kind and attentive to her ; there had been no formality , no stiffness ; she had soon felt acquainted with all the room ; and , as to Mr. Bennet , she could not conceive an angel more beautiful . Darcy , on the contrary , had seen a collection of people in whom there was little beauty and no fashion , for none of whom she had felt the smallest interest , and from none received either attention or pleasure . Mr. Bennet  acknowledged to be pretty , but he smiled too much . Mrs. Hurst and her her sister allowed it to be so -- but still they admired him and liked him , and pronounced him to be a sweet girl , and one whom they would not object to know more of . Mr. Bennet was therefore established as a sweet girl , and their sister felt authorized by such commendation to think of him as she chose .
