Chapter 28 Every object in the next day 's journey was new and interesting to Edward ; and him spirits were in a state of enjoyment ; for he had seen his  brother looking so well as to banish all fear for him health , and the prospect of him northern tour was a constant source of delight .
When they left the high road for the lane to Hunsford , every eye was in search of the Parsonage , and every turning expected to bring it in view .
The palings of Rosings Park was their boundary on one side . Edward smiled at the recollection of all that he had heard of its inhabitants .
At length the Parsonage was discernible . The garden sloping to the road , the house standing in it , the green pales , and the laurel hedge , everything declared they were arriving . Mr. Collins and Charlotte appeared at the door , and the carriage stopped at the small gate which led by a short gravel walk to the house , amidst the nods and smiles of the whole party .
In a moment they were all out of the chaise , rejoicing at the sight of each other . Mrs. Collins welcomed her her friend with the liveliest pleasure , and Edward was more and more satisfied with coming when he found himself so affectionately received . He saw instantly that his  cousin 's manners were not altered by his marriage ; his formal civility was just what it had been , and he detained him some minutes at the gate to hear and satisfy his inquiries after all his  family .
They were then , with no other delay than his pointing out the neatness of the entrance , taken into the house ; and as soon as they were in the parlour , he welcomed them a second time , with ostentatious formality to his his humble abode , and punctually repeated all his his wife 's offers of refreshment . Edward was prepared to see him in his glory ; and he could not help in fancying that in displaying the good proportion of the room , its aspect and its furniture , he addressed himself particularly to him , as if wishing to make him feel what he had lost in refusing him .
But though everything seemed neat and comfortable , he was not able to gratify him by any sigh of repentance , and rather looked with wonder at his  friend that she could have so cheerful an air with such a companion .
When Mr. Collins said anything of which his his wife might reasonably be ashamed , which certainly was not unseldom , he involuntarily turned him eye on Charlotte .
Once or twice he could discern a faint blush ; but in general Charlotte wisely did not hear .
After sitting long enough to admire every article of furniture in the room , from the sideboard to the fender , to give an account of their journey , and of all that had happened in London , Mr. Collins invited them to take a stroll in the garden , which was large and well laid out , and to the cultivation of which he attended himself .
To work in this garden was one of his most respectable pleasures ; and Edward admired the command of countenance with which Charlotte talked of the healthfulness of the exercise , and owned she encouraged it as much as possible . Here , leading the way through every walk and cross walk , and scarcely allowing them an interval to utter the praises he asked for , every view was pointed out with a minuteness which left beauty entirely behind . He could number the fields in every direction , and could tell how many trees there were in the most distant clump .
But of all the views which his his garden , or which the country or kingdom could boast , none were to be compared with the prospect of Rosings , afforded by an opening in the trees that bordered the park nearly opposite the front of his his house . It was a handsome modern building , well situated on rising ground .
From his his garden , Mr. Collins would have led them round his his two meadows ; but the ladies , not having shoes to encounter the remains of a white frost , turned back ; and while Sir William accompanied him , Charlotte took her her sister and friend over the house , extremely well pleased , probably , to have the opportunity of showing it without her her husband 's help . It was rather small , but well built and convenient ; and everything was fitted up and arranged with a neatness and consistency of which Edward gave Charlotte all the credit .
When Mr. Collins could be forgotten , there was really an air of great comfort throughout , and by Charlotte 's evident enjoyment of it , Edward supposed he must be often forgotten . He had already learnt that Lady Catherine was still in the country .
It was spoken of again while they were at dinner , when Mr. Collins joining in , observed : `` Yes , Mr. Edward , you will have the honour of seeing Lady Catherine de Bourgh on the ensuing Sunday at church , and I need not say you will be delighted with her . She is all affability and condescension , and I doubt not but you will be honoured with some portion of her notice when service is over .
I have scarcely any hesitation in saying she will include you and my sister Maria in every invitation with which she honours us during your stay here . Her behaviour to my dear Charlotte is charming . We dine at Rosings twice every week , and are never allowed to walk home . Her Her ladyship 's carriage is regularly ordered for us .
I _ should _ say , one of her her ladyship 's carriages , for she has several . ''
`` Lady Catherine is a very respectable , sensible woman indeed , '' added Charlotte , `` and a most attentive neighbour . ''
`` Very true , my dear , that is exactly what I say . She is the sort of woman whom one can not regard with too much deference . ''
The evening was spent chiefly in talking over Hertfordshire news , and telling again what had already been written ; and when it closed , Edward , in the solitude of his  chamber , had to meditate upon Charlotte 's degree of contentment , to understand her address in guiding , and composure in bearing with , her her husband , and to acknowledge that it was all done very well . He had also to anticipate how him visit would pass , the quiet tenor of their usual employments , the vexatious interruptions of Mr. Collins , and the gaieties of their intercourse with Rosings .
A lively imagination soon settled it all .
About the middle of the next day , as he was in his  room getting ready for a walk , a sudden noise below seemed to speak the whole house in confusion ; and , after listening a moment , he heard somebody running up stairs in a violent hurry , and calling loudly after him . He opened the door and met Maria in the landing place , who , breathless with agitation , cried out -- `` Oh , my dear Ed !
pray make haste and come into the dining-room , for there is such a sight to be seen !
I will not tell you what it is .
Make haste , and come down this moment . '' Edward asked questions in vain ; Maria would tell him nothing more , and down they ran into the dining-room , which fronted the lane , in quest of this wonder ; It was two ladies stopping in a low phaeton at the garden gate .
`` And is this all ? '' cried Edward .
`` I expected at least that the pigs were got into the garden , and here is nothing but Lady Catherine and her her daughter . ''
`` La !
my dear , '' said Maria , quite shocked at the mistake , `` it is not Lady Catherine . The old lady is Mrs. Jenkinson , who lives with them ; the other is Miss de Bourgh .
Only look at her . She is quite a little creature .
Who would have thought that she could be so thin and small ? ''
`` She is abominably rude to keep Charlotte out of doors in all this wind .
Why does she not come in ? ''
`` Oh , Charlotte says she hardly ever does .
It is the greatest of favours when Miss de Bourgh comes in . ''
`` I like her appearance , '' said Edward , struck with other ideas .
`` She looks sickly and cross .
Yes , she will do for her very well . She will make her ery proper wife . '' Mr. Collins and Charlotte were both standing at the gate in conversation with the ladies ; and Sir William , to Edward 's high diversion , was stationed in the doorway , in earnest contemplation of the greatness before him , and constantly bowing whenever Miss de Bourgh looked that way .
At length there was nothing more to be said ; the ladies drove on , and the others returned into the house . Mr. Collins no sooner saw the two girls than he began to congratulate them on their good fortune , which Charlotte explained by letting them know that the whole party was asked to dine at Rosings the next day .
