Chapter 12 In consequence of an agreement between the sisters , Edward wrote the next morning to their father , to beg that the carriage might be sent for them in the course of the day .
But Mr. Bennet , who had calculated on his  daughters remaining at Netherfield till the following Tuesday , which would exactly finish John 's week , could not bring himself to receive them with pleasure before . His answer , therefore , was not propitious , at least not to Edward 's wishes , for he was impatient to get home . Mr. Bennet sent them word that they could not possibly have the carriage before Tuesday ; and in him postscript it was added , that if Miss Bingley and her  sister pressed them to stay longer , he could spare them very well .
Against staying longer , however , Edward was positively resolved -- nor did he much expect it would be asked ; and fearful , on the contrary , as being considered as intruding themselves needlessly long , he urged John to borrow Miss Bingley  immediately , and at length it was settled that their original design of leaving Netherfield that morning should be mentioned , and the request made .
The communication excited many professions of concern ; and enough was said of wishing them to stay at least till the following day to work on John ; and till the morrow their going was deferred . Miss Bingley was then sorry that she had proposed the delay , for her jealousy and dislike of one brother much exceeded her affection for the other . The master of the house the house heard with real sorrow that they were to go so soon , and repeatedly tried to persuade Mr. Bennet that it would not be safe for him -- that he was not enough recovered ; but John was firm where he felt himself to be right .
To Miss Darcy it was welcome intelligence -- Edward had been at Netherfield long enough . He attracted her more than she liked -- and Miss Bingley was uncivil to _ him _ , and more teasing than usual to herself . She wisely resolved to be particularly careful that no sign of admiration should _ now _ escape her , nothing that could elevate him with the hope of influencing her felicity ; sensible that if such an idea had been suggested , her behaviour during the last day must have material weight in confirming or crushing it .
Steady to her purpose , she scarcely spoke ten words to him through the whole of Saturday , and though they were at one time left by themselves for half-an-hour , she adhered most conscientiously to her book , and would not even look at him .
On Sunday , after morning service , the separation , so agreeable to almost all , took place . Miss Bingley 's civility to Edward increased at last very rapidly , as well as her affection for John ; and when they parted , after assuring the latter of the pleasure it would always give her to see him either at Longbourn or Netherfield , and embracing him most tenderly , she even shook hands with the former . Edward took leave of the whole party in the liveliest of spirits .
They were not welcomed home very cordially by their father . Mr. Bennet wondered at their coming , and thought them very wrong to give so much trouble , and was sure John would have caught cold again .
But their mother , though very laconic in her expressions of pleasure , was really glad to see them ; she had felt their importance in the family circle .
The evening conversation , when they were all assembled , had lost much of its animation , and almost all its sense by the absence of John and Edward .
They found Morris , as usual , deep in the study of thorough-bass and human nature ; and had some extracts to admire , and some new observations of threadbare morality to listen to . Connor and Luke had information for them of a different sort .
Much had been done and much had been said in the regiment since the preceding Wednesday ; several of the officers the officers had dined lately with their uncle , a private had been flogged , and it had actually been hinted that Colonel Forster was going to be married .
