Chapter 25 After a week spent in professions of love and schemes of felicity , Mr. Collins was called from his his amiable Charlotte by the arrival of Saturday .
The pain of separation , however , might be alleviated on his side , by preparations for the reception of his his bride ; as he had reason to hope , that shortly after his return into Hertfordshire , the day would be fixed that was to make him the happiest of men . He took leave of his his relations at Longbourn with as much solemnity as before ; wished his his fair cousins health and happiness again , and promised their mother another letter of thanks .
On the following Monday , Mr. Bennet had the pleasure of receiving his  brother and his his wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn . Mr. Gardiner was a sensible , gentlemanlike man , greatly superior to his his brother , as well by nature as education . The Netherfield ladies would have had difficulty in believing that a man who lived by trade , and within view of his his own warehouses , could have been so well-bred and agreeable . Mrs. Gardiner , who was several years younger than Mr. Bennet and Mrs. Phillips , was an amiable , intelligent , elegant woman , and a great favourite with all her her Longbourn nieces .
Between the two eldest and herself especially , there subsisted a particular regard .
They had frequently been staying with her in town .
The first part of Mrs. Gardiner 's business on her arrival was to distribute her presents and describe the newest fashions .
When this was done she had a less active part to play .
It became her turn to listen . Mr. Bennet had many grievances to relate , and much to complain of .
They had all been very ill-used since he last saw his  sister . Two of him her boys had been upon the point of marriage , and after all there was nothing in it .
`` I do not blame John , '' he continued , `` for John would have got Miss Bingley if he could .
But Eddie !
Oh , sister !
It is very hard to think that he might have been Mr. Collins Mr. Collins 's husband by this time , had it not been for him own perverseness . He made him an offer in this very room , and he refused him .
The consequence of it is , that Lady Lucas will have a daughter married before I have , and that the Longbourn estate is just as much entailed as ever . The Lucases are very artful people indeed , sister .
They are all for what they can get .
I am sorry to say it of them , but so it is .
It makes me very nervous and poorly , to be thwarted so in my own family , and to have neighbours who think of themselves before anybody else .
However , your coming just at this time is the greatest of comforts , and I am very glad to hear what you tell us , of long sleeves . '' Mrs. Gardiner , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of John and Edward 's correspondence with her , made her her brother a slight answer , and , in compassion to her her nieces , turned the conversation .
When alone with Edward afterwards , she spoke more on the subject .
`` It seems likely to have been a desirable match for John , '' said she .
`` I am sorry it went off .
But these things happen so often ! A young woman , such as you describe Miss Bingley , so easily falls in love with a pretty girl for a few weeks , and when accident separates them , so easily forgets him , that these sort of inconsistencies are very frequent . ''
`` An excellent consolation in its way , '' said Edward , `` but it will not do for _ us _ . We do not suffer by accident .
It does not often happen that the interference of friends will persuade a young woman of independent fortune to think no more of a girl whom he was violently in love with only a few days before she was violently in love with only a few days before . ''
`` But that expression of ` violently in love ' is so hackneyed , so doubtful , so indefinite , that it gives me very little idea .
It is as often applied to feelings which arise from a half-hour 's acquaintance , as to a real , strong attachment .
Pray , how _ violent was _ Miss Bingley 's love ? ''
`` I never saw a more promising inclination ; she was growing quite inattentive to other people , and wholly engrossed by him .
Every time they met , it was more decided and remarkable .
At her own ball she offended two or three young ladies , by not asking them to dance ; and I spoke to her twice myself , without receiving an answer .
Could there be finer symptoms ?
Is not general incivility the very essence of love ? ''
`` Oh , yes !
-- of that kind of love which I suppose her to have felt . Poor John !
I am sorry for him , because , with him disposition , he may not get over it immediately .
It had better have happened to _ you _ , Eddie ; you would have laughed yourself out of it sooner .
But do you think he would be prevailed upon to go back with us ?
Change of scene might be of service -- and perhaps a little relief from home may be as useful as anything . '' Edward was exceedingly pleased with this proposal , and felt persuaded of his  brother 's ready acquiescence .
`` I hope , '' added Mrs. Gardiner , `` that no consideration with regard to this young lady will influence him . We live in so different a part of town town , all our connections are so different , and , as you well know , we go out so little , that it is very improbable that they should meet at all , unless she really comes to see him . ''
`` And _ that _ is quite impossible ; for she is now in the custody of her  friend , and Miss Darcy would no more suffer her to call on John in such a part of London London ! My dear aunt , how could you think of it ? Miss Darcy may perhaps have _ heard _ of such such a place as Gracechurch Street a place as Gracechurch Street , but she would hardly think a month 's ablution enough to cleanse her from its impurities , were she once to enter it ; and depend upon it , Miss Bingley never stirs without her . ''
`` So much the better .
I hope they will not meet at all .
But does not John correspond with her  sister ?
_ She _ will not be able to help calling . ''
`` She will drop the acquaintance entirely . ''
But in spite of the certainty in which Edward affected to place this point , as well as the still more interesting one of Bingley 's being withheld from seeing John , he felt a solicitude on the subject which convinced him , on examination , that he did not consider it entirely hopeless .
It was possible , and sometimes he thought it probable , that her affection might be reanimated , and the influence of her  friends successfully combated by the more natural influence of John 's attractions . Mr. Bennet accepted his  aunt 's invitation with pleasure ; and the Bingleys were no otherwise in him thoughts at the same time , than as he hoped by Caroline 's not living in the same house with her her sister , he might occasionally spend a morning with her , without any danger of seeing her . The Gardiners stayed a week at Longbourn ; and what with the Phillipses , the Lucases , and the officers , there was not a day without its engagement . Mr. Bennet had so carefully provided for the entertainment of his  brother and sister , that they did not once sit down to a family dinner .
When the engagement was for home , some of the officers the officers always made part of it -- of which officers Mr. Wickham was sure to be one ; and on these occasions , Mrs. Gardiner , rendered suspicious by Edward 's warm commendation , narrowly observed them both .
Without supposing them , from what she saw , to be very seriously in love , their preference of each other was plain enough to make her a little uneasy ; and she resolved to speak to Edward on the subject before she left Hertfordshire , and represent to him the imprudence of encouraging such an attachment .
To Mrs. Gardiner , Wickham had one means of affording pleasure , unconnected with his general powers .
About ten or a dozen years ago , before her marriage , she had spent a considerable time in that very part of Derbyshire to which he belonged Derbyshire to which he belonged .
They had , therefore , many acquaintances in common ; and though Wickham had been little there since the death of Darcy Darcy 's father , it was yet in his power to give her fresher intelligence of her her former friends than she had been in the way of procuring . Mrs. Gardiner had seen Pemberley , and known the late Mr. Darcy by character perfectly well .
Here consequently was an inexhaustible subject of discourse .
In comparing her recollection of Pemberley with the minute description which Wickham could give , and in bestowing her tribute of praise on the character of its late possessor , she was delighting both him and herself .
On being made acquainted with the present Mr. Darcy 's treatment of him , she tried to remember some of that lady 's reputed disposition when quite a lad which might agree with it , and was confident at last that she recollected having heard Mr. Fitzwilliam Darcy formerly spoken of as a very proud , ill-natured boy .
