Chapter 32

Edward was sitting by himself the next morning, and writing to John while Mrs. Collins and Maria were gone on business into the village, when he was startled by a ring at the door, the certain signal of a visitor.
As he had heard no carriage, he thought it not unlikely to be Lady Catherine, and under that apprehension was putting away him half-finished letter that he might escape all impertinent questions, when the door opened, and, to him very great surprise, Miss Darcy, and Miss Darcy only, entered the room. She seemed astonished too on finding him alone, and apologised for her intrusion by letting him know that she had understood all the ladies were to be within.
They then sat down, and when him inquiries after Rosings were made, seemed in danger of sinking into total silence.
It was absolutely necessary, therefore, to think of something, and in this emergence recollecting when he had seen her last in Hertfordshire, and feeling curious to know what she would say on the subject of their hasty departure, he observed: "How very suddenly you all quitted Netherfield last November, Miss Darcy!
It must have been a most agreeable surprise to Miss Bingley to see you all after her so soon; for, if I recollect right, she went but the day before. She and her sisters were well, I hope, when you left London?"
"Perfectly so, I thank you." He found that he was to receive no other answer, and, after a short pause added: "I think I have understood that Miss Bingley has not much idea of ever returning to Netherfield again?"
"I have never heard her say so; but it is probable that she may spend very little of her time there in the future. She has many friends, and is at a time of life when friends and engagements are continually increasing."
"If she means to be but little at Netherfield, it would be better for the neighbourhood that she should give up the place entirely, for then we might possibly get a settled family there.
But, perhaps, Miss Bingley did not take the house so much for the convenience of the neighbourhood as for her own, and we must expect her to keep it or quit it on the same principle."
"I should not be surprised," said Darcy, "if she were to give it up as soon as any eligible purchase offers." Edward made no answer. He was afraid of talking longer of her friend; and, having nothing else to say, was now determined to leave the trouble of finding a subject to her. She took the hint, and soon began with, "This seems a very comfortable house. Lady Catherine, I believe, did a great deal to it when Mr. Collins first came to Hunsford."
"I believe she did -- and I am sure she could not have bestowed her kindness on a more grateful object."
"Mr. Collins appears to be very fortunate in his choice of a wife."
"Yes, indeed, his his friends may well rejoice in his having met with one of the very few sensible women who would have accepted him him, or have made him happy if they had. My friend has an excellent understanding -- though I am not certain that I consider her marrying Mr. Collins as the wisest thing she ever did. She seems perfectly happy, however, and in a prudential light it is certainly a very good match for her."
"It must be very agreeable for her to be settled within so easy a distance of her her own family and friends."
"An easy distance, do you call it?
It is nearly fifty miles."
"And what is fifty miles of good road?
Little more than half a day's journey.
Yes, I call it a very easy distance."
"I should never have considered the distance as one of the advantages of the match," cried Edward.
"I should never have said Mrs. Collins was settled near her her family."
"It is a proof of your own attachment to Hertfordshire.
Anything beyond the very neighbourhood of Longbourn, I suppose, would appear far."
As she spoke there was a sort of smile which Edward fancied he understood; she must be supposing him to be thinking of John and Netherfield, and he blushed as he answered: "I do not mean to say that a man may not be settled too near his family.
The far and the near must be relative, and depend on many varying circumstances.
Where there is fortune to make the expenses of travelling unimportant, distance becomes no evil.
But that is not the case here.
Mr. and Mrs. Collins have a comfortable income, but not such a one as will allow of frequent journeys -- and I am persuaded my friend would not call herself near her her family under less than half the present distance." Miss Darcy drew her chair a little towards him, and said, "You can not have a right to such very strong local attachment.
You can not have been always at Longbourn." Edward looked surprised. The lady experienced some change of feeling; she drew back her chair, took a newspaper from the table, and glancing over it, said, in a colder voice: "Are you pleased with Kent?"
A short dialogue on the subject of the country ensued, on either side calm and concise -- and soon put an end to by the entrance of Charlotte and her her sister, just returned from her walk.
The tête-à-tête surprised them. Miss Darcy related the mistake which had occasioned her intruding on Mr. Bennet, and after sitting a few minutes longer without saying much to anybody, went away.
"What can be the meaning of this?" said Charlotte, as soon as she was gone.
"My dear, Ed, she must be in love with you, or she would never have called us in this familiar way."
But when Edward told of her silence, it did not seem very likely, even to Charlotte's wishes, to be the case; and after various conjectures, they could at last only suppose her visit to proceed from the difficulty of finding anything to do, which was the more probable from the time of year.
All field sports were over.
Within doors there was Lady Catherine, books, and a billiard-table, but ladies can not always be within doors; and in the nearness of the Parsonage, or the pleasantness of the walk to it, or of the people who lived in it it, the two cousins found a temptation from this period of walking thither almost every day.
They called at various times of the morning, sometimes separately, sometimes together, and now and then accompanied by their aunt.
It was plain to them all that Colonel Fitzwilliam came because he had pleasure in their society, a persuasion which of course recommended him still more; and Edward was reminded by him own satisfaction in being with him, as well as by his evident admiration of him, of his former favourite ; and though, in comparing them, she saw there was less captivating softness in Colonel Fitzwilliam's manners, he believed he might have the best informed mind.
But why Miss Darcy came so often to the Parsonage, it was more difficult to understand.
It could not be for society, as she frequently sat there ten minutes together without opening her lips; and when she did speak, it seemed the effect of necessity rather than of choice -- a sacrifice to propriety, not a pleasure to herself. She seldom appeared really animated. Mrs. Collins knew not what to make of her. Colonel Fitzwilliam's occasionally laughing at her stupidity, proved that she was generally different, which her own knowledge of her could not have told her; and as she would liked to have believed this change the effect of love, and the object of that love her her friend Ed, she set herself seriously to work to find it out. She watched her whenever they were at Rosings, and whenever she came to Hunsford; but without much success. She certainly looked at her her friend a great deal, but the expression of that look was disputable.
It was an earnest, steadfast gaze, but she often doubted whether there were much admiration in it, and sometimes it seemed nothing but absence of mind. She had once or twice suggested to Edward the possibility of her being partial to him, but Edward always laughed at the idea; and Mrs. Collins did not think it right to press the subject, from the danger of raising expectations which might only end in disappointment; for in her opinion it admitted not of a doubt, that all her her friend's dislike would vanish, if he could suppose her to be in him power.
In her kind schemes for Edward, she sometimes planned him marrying Colonel Fitzwilliam. He was beyond comparison the most pleasant man; he certainly admired him, and his situation in life was most eligible; but, to counterbalance these advantages, Miss Darcy had considerable patronage in the church, and her cousin could have none at all.
