Chapter 20

Mr. Collins was not left long to the silent contemplation of his successful love; for Mr. Bennet, having dawdled about in the vestibule to watch for the end of the conference, no sooner saw Edward open the door and with quick step pass him towards the staircase, than he entered the breakfast-room, and congratulated both him and himself in warm terms on the happy prospect of their nearer connection. Mr. Collins received and returned these felicitations with equal pleasure, and then proceeded to relate the particulars of their interview, with the result of which he trusted he had every reason to be satisfied, since the refusal which his his cousin had steadfastly given him would naturally flow from him bashful modesty and the genuine delicacy of him character.
This information, however, startled Mr. Bennet; he would have been glad to be equally satisfied that his son had meant to encourage him by protesting against his proposals, but he dared not believe it, and could not help saying so.
"But, depend upon it, Mr. Collins," he added, "that Eddie shall be brought to reason.
I will speak to him about it directly. He is a very headstrong, foolish boy, and does not know him own interest but I will make him know it."
"Pardon me for interrupting you, sir," cried Mr. Collins; "but if he is really headstrong and foolish, I know not whether he would altogether be a very desirable wife to a man in my situation, who naturally looks for happiness in the marriage state.
If therefore he actually persists in rejecting my suit, perhaps it were better not to force him into accepting me, because if liable to such defects of temper, he could not contribute much to my felicity."
"Sir, you quite misunderstand me," said Mr. Bennet, alarmed.
"Eddie is only headstrong in such matters as these.
In everything else he is as good-natured a boy as ever lived.
I will go directly to Mrs. Bennet, and we shall very soon settle it with him, I am sure." He would not give him time to reply, but hurrying instantly to his wife, called out as he entered the library, "Oh! Mrs. Bennet, you are wanted immediately; we are all in an uproar.
You must come and make Eddie marry Mr. Collins, for he vows he will not have him, and if you do not make haste he will change his mind and not have him." Mrs. Bennet raised her eyes from her book as he entered, and fixed them on him face with a calm unconcern which was not in the least altered by him communication.
"I have not the pleasure of understanding you," said she, when he had finished him speech.
"Of what are you talking?"
"Of Mr. Collins and Eddie. Eddie declares he will not have Mr. Collins, and Mr. Collins begins to say that he will not have Eddie."
"And what am I to do on the occasion?
It seems an hopeless business."
"Speak to Eddie about it yourself.
Tell him that you insist upon him marrying him."
"Let him be called down. He shall hear my opinion." Mr. Bennet rang the bell, and Mr. Edward was summoned to the library.
"Come here, child," cried his mother as he appeared.
"I have sent for you on an affair of importance.
I understand that Mr. Collins has made you an offer of marriage.
Is it true?" Edward replied that it was.
"Very well -- and this offer of marriage you have refused?"
"I have, madam."
"Very well. We now come to the point. Your father insists upon your accepting it.
Is it not so, Mr. Bennet?"
"Yes, or I will never see him again."
"An unhappy alternative is before you, Edward.
From this day you must be a stranger to one of your parents your parents. Your father will never see you again if you do not marry Mr. Collins, and I will never see you again if you do." Edward could not but smile at such a conclusion of such a beginning, but Mr. Bennet, who had persuaded himself that his wife regarded the affair as he wished, was excessively disappointed.
"What do you mean, Mrs. Bennet, in talking this way?
You promised me to insist upon him marrying him."
"My dear," replied his wife, "I have two small favours to request.
First, that you will allow me the free use of my understanding on the present occasion; and secondly, of my room.
I shall be glad to have the library to myself as soon as may be."
Not yet, however, in spite of him disappointment in his wife, did Mr. Bennet give up the point. He talked to Edward again and again; coaxed and threatened him by turns. He endeavoured to secure John in him interest; but John, with all possible mildness, declined interfering; and Edward, sometimes with real earnestness, and sometimes with playful gaiety, replied to him attacks.
Though him manner varied, however, him determination never did. Mr. Collins, meanwhile, was meditating in solitude on what had passed. He thought too well of himself to comprehend on what motives his his cousin could refuse him; and though his pride was hurt, he suffered in no other way. His regard for him was quite imaginary; and the possibility of him deserving his father's reproach prevented his feeling any regret.
While the family were in this confusion, Charlotte Lucas came to spend the day with them. She was met in the vestibule by Luke, who, flying to her, cried in a half whisper, "I am glad you are come, for there is such fun here!
What do you think has happened this morning? Mr. Collins has made an offer to Eddie, and he will not have him." Charlotte hardly had time to answer, before they were joined by Connie, who came to tell the same news; and no sooner had they entered the breakfast-room, where Mr. Bennet was alone, than he likewise began on the subject, calling on Miss Lucas for her compassion, and entreating her to persuade her her friend Eddie to comply with the wishes of all his family.
"Pray do, my dear Miss Lucas," he added in a melancholy tone, "for nobody is on my side, nobody takes part with me.
I am cruelly used, nobody feels for my poor nerves." Charlotte's reply was spared by the entrance of John and Edward.
"Aye, there he comes," continued Mr. Bennet, "looking as unconcerned as may be, and caring no more for us than if we were at York, provided he can have him own way.
But I tell you, Mr. Eddie -- if you take it into your head to go on refusing every offer of marriage in this way, you will never get a husband at all -- and I am sure I do not know who is to maintain you when your mother is dead.
I shall not be able to keep you -- and so I warn you.
I have done with you from this very day.
I told you in the library, you know, that I should never speak to you again, and you will find me as good as my word.
I have no pleasure in talking to undutiful children.
Not that I have much pleasure, indeed, in talking to anybody.
People who suffer as I do from nervous complaints can have no great inclination for talking. Nobody can tell what I suffer!
But it is always so. Those who do not complain are never pitied." His sons listened in silence to this effusion, sensible that any attempt to reason with him or soothe him would only increase the irritation. He talked on, therefore, without interruption from any of them, till they were joined by Mr. Collins, who entered the room with an air more stately than usual, and on perceiving whom, he said to the boys, "Now, I do insist upon it, that you, all of you, hold your tongues, and let me and Mr. Collins have a little conversation together." Edward passed quietly out of the room, John and Connie followed, but Luke stood him ground, determined to hear all he could; and Charlotte, detained first by the civility of Mr. Collins, whose inquiries after herself and all her her family were very minute, and then by a little curiosity, satisfied herself with walking to the window and pretending not to hear.
In a doleful voice Mr. Bennet began the projected conversation: "Oh! Mr. Collins!"
"My dear madam," replied he, "let us be for ever silent on this point.
Far be it from me," he presently continued, in a voice that marked his displeasure, "to resent the behaviour of your son.
Resignation to inevitable evils is the duty of us all; the peculiar duty of a young man who has been so fortunate as I have been in early preferment; and I trust I am resigned.
Perhaps not the less so from feeling a doubt of my positive happiness had my handsome cousin honoured me with him hand; for I have often observed that resignation is never so perfect as when the blessing denied begins to lose somewhat of its value in our estimation.
You will not, I hope, consider me as showing any disrespect to your family, my dear sir, by thus withdrawing my pretensions to your son's favour, without having paid yourself and Mrs. Bennet the compliment of requesting you to interpose your authority in my behalf.
My conduct may, I fear, be objectionable in having accepted my dismission from your son's lips instead of your own.
But we are all liable to error.
I have certainly meant well through the whole affair.
My object has been to secure an amiable companion for myself, with due consideration for the advantage of all your family, and if my manner has been at all reprehensible, I here beg leave to apologise."
