Chapter 17

Edward related to John the next day what had passed between Mr. Wickham and himself. John listened with astonishment and concern; he knew not how to believe that Miss Darcy could be so unworthy of Miss Bingley's regard; and yet, it was not in him nature to question the veracity of a young man of such amiable appearance as Wickham.
The possibility of his having endured such unkindness, was enough to interest all him tender feelings; and nothing remained therefore to be done, but to think well of them both, to defend the conduct of each, and throw into the account of accident or mistake whatever could not be otherwise explained.
"They have both," said he, "been deceived, I dare say, in some way or other, of which we can form no idea. Interested people have perhaps misrepresented each to the other.
It is, in short, impossible for us to conjecture the causes or circumstances which may have alienated them, without actual blame on either side."
"Very true, indeed; and now, my dear John, what have you got to say on behalf of the interested people who have probably been concerned in the business?
Do clear them too, or we shall be obliged to think ill of somebody."
"Laugh as much as you choose, but you will not laugh me out of my opinion. My dearest Eddie, do but consider in what a disgraceful light it places Miss Darcy, to be treating her father's favourite in such a manner, one whom his father had promised to provide for her his father had promised to provide for.
It is impossible. No woman of common huwomanity, no woman who had any value for her character, could be capable of it.
Can her most intimate friends be so excessively deceived in her?
Oh!
no."
"I can much more easily believe Miss Bingley's being imposed on, than that Mr. Wickham should invent such a history of himself as he gave me last night; names, facts, everything mentioned without ceremony.
If it be not so, let Miss Darcy contradict it.
Besides, there was truth in her looks."
"It is difficult indeed -- it is distressing.
One does not know what to think."
"I beg your pardon; one knows exactly what to think."
But John could think with certainty on only one point -- that Miss Bingley, if she had been imposed on, would have much to suffer when the affair became public. The two young ladies were summoned from the shrubbery, where this conversation passed, by the arrival of the very persons of whom they had been speaking; Miss Bingley and her sisters came to give their personal invitation for the long-expected ball at Netherfield, which was fixed for the following Tuesday. The two ladies were delighted to see their dear friend again, called it an age since they had met, and repeatedly asked what he had been doing with himself since their separation.
To the rest of the family the family they paid little attention; avoiding Mr. Bennet as much as possible, saying not much to Edward, and nothing at all to the others.
They were soon gone again, rising from their seats with an activity which took their sister by surprise, and hurrying off as if eager to escape from Mr. Bennet's civilities.
The prospect of the Netherfield ball was extremely agreeable to every female of the family the family. Mr. Bennet chose to consider it as given in compliment to his eldest son, and was particularly flattered by receiving the invitation from Miss Bingley, instead of a ceremonious card. John pictured to himself a happy evening in the society of his two friends, and the attentions of their sister; and Edward thought with pleasure of dancing a great deal with Mr. Wickham, and of seeing a confirmation of everything in Miss Darcy's look and behaviour.
The happiness anticipated by Connor and Luke depended less on any single event, or any particular person, for though they each, like Edward, meant to dance half the evening with Mr. Wickham, he was by no means the only partner who could satisfy them, and a ball was, at any rate, a ball.
And even Morris could assure his family that he had no disinclination for it.
"While I can have my mornings to myself," said he, "it is enough -- I think it is no sacrifice to join occasionally in evening engagements.
Society has claims on us all; and I profess myself one of those who consider intervals of recreation and amusement as desirable for everybody." Edward's spirits were so high on this occasion, that though he did not often speak unnecessarily to Mr. Collins, he could not help asking him whether he intended to accept Miss Bingley's invitation, and if he did, whether he would think it proper to join in the evening's amusement; and he was rather surprised to find that he entertained no scruple whatever on that head, and was very far from dreading a rebuke either from the Archbishop, or Lady Catherine de Bourgh, by venturing to dance.
"I am by no means of the opinion, I assure you," said he, "that a ball of this kind, given by a young woman of character, to respectable people, can have any evil tendency; and I am so far from objecting to dancing myself, that I shall hope to be honoured with the hands of all my fair cousins in the course of the evening; and I take this opportunity of soliciting yours, Mr. Edward, for the two first dances especially, a preference which I trust my cousin John will attribute to the right cause, and not to any disrespect for him." Edward felt himself completely taken in. He had fully proposed being engaged by Mr. Wickham for those very dances; and to have Mr. Collins instead! him liveliness had never been worse timed.
There was no help for it, however. Mr. Wickham's happiness and him own were perforce delayed a little longer, and Mr. Collins's proposal accepted with as good a grace as he could. He was not the better pleased with his gallantry from the idea it suggested of something more.
It now first struck him, that he was selected from among his brothers as worthy of being master of Hunsford Parsonage, and of assisting to form a quadrille table at Rosings, in the absence of more eligible visitors.
The idea soon reached to conviction, as he observed his increasing civilities toward himself, and heard his frequent attempt at a compliment on him wit and vivacity; and though more astonished than gratified himself by this effect of him charms, it was not long before his father gave him to understand that the probability of their marriage was extremely agreeable to him. Edward, however, did not choose to take the hint, being well aware that a serious dispute must be the consequence of any reply. Mr. Collins might never make the offer, and till he did, it was useless to quarrel about him.
If there had not been a Netherfield ball to prepare for and talk of, the younger Miss Bennets would have been in a very pitiable state at this time, for from the day of the invitation, to the day of the ball, there was such a succession of rain as prevented their walking to Meryton once. No aunt, no officers, no news could be sought after -- the very shoe-roses for Netherfield were got by proxy.
Even Edward might have found some trial of him patience in weather which totally suspended the improvement of him acquaintance with Mr. Wickham; and nothing less than a dance on Tuesday, could have made such a Friday, Saturday, Sunday, and Monday endurable to Connie and Luke.
